Innvandring i et sammfunnsøkonomis lys. 

Immigration from an econmic standpoint.
 
Much of the debate on who gets to enter ones borders often boils down to peoples inner balance betwen  sympathy and fear. This is where the feild of statistics so usefull. From a Big picture perspective what really matters is the socioeconomic inpact.
 
One of the most obvious facts oin the feils olf demography is the fact that the more a contry becomes developedn, the lower its birthrate. on the qyestion of why this is we will not go into. But as is quite determined by data: couteis that score high on the uns develpement index also tend to have a birthrate of less than 2.1 births per whoman, this is anmpoterh way of saying that the population is shirinking. at 1 baby per whoman for instanve the birhrate would halve every genertaion(25-35 years)

Why is this relevant to the socioeconolmic inpavt on immigbration? well because economi output of any coutre6y is to a large degree proportonal to the number of workers times the productive output of each worker. 

https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2023/12/14/The-Macroeconomic-Effects-of-Large-Immigration-Waves-542526?utm_source=chatgpt.com

So in that sence. if a western coutry who typically has a birthrate of less than 2.1 births per wholman, yes that includes norway, (1.4 avbtyally) should have a stong insentive to increase its population. either by govermentfunded insentives for couples to have more babies or by takning inn the amount of imagrints enough to atleast sustain the population dectline to be stable at a 0% decline. 

Norway government has alleady tried this by funting ... someting someting for vouples and "pappaperm" but the birthrate is still at ...

Economics is not however as phyusics. it is highly complex in the sence that everyhing depens on everhiontn all the time. and also in the sence that there is only so much data out there to makw any kind of deterministic conl;uton on how tings affect eachoter. but whhat is ceratn is that norway has, thanks to immibraton cept a steaduo popupaton of around 5.5? million citisens thanjks to immigraon. 

But what is the ecomic cost/benefit on average of each citisen? this ofcource is not reguarding the unmeasurable human innate value that a human means to other humans in norway . rather this is a "as much as possible" analysis? of how much each citizen contruputes to the norwegiaon sociuetety from a ecnomic perspecutve. Louclally the SSB in norway has some analusus on this: here it is: 


... fill innn that here: ... 

nice conclution*** 

thanks. 
